---
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

# Raster To Terra (and geodata): Modernizing spatial data analysis

[*UC Davis DataLab*](https://datalab.ucdavis.edu/)

*Fall 2023*

*Instructor/Maintainer: Elise Hellwig
[echellwig\@ucdavis.edu](mailto:echellwig@ucdavis.edu){.email}*

-   [Reader](https://d-rug.github.io/raster_to_terra/)
-   [Repo](https://github.com/d-rug/raster_to_terra)

No one wants to relearn something they already know how to do. But
sometimes there's no other choice. The sp, rgdal, rgeos, and maptools
packages will be [gone by the end of
2023](https://r-spatial.org/r/2023/05/15/evolution4.html). The raster
package is not long for this world
[either](https://rspatial.org/raster/). sf is nice, but it doesn't have
the necessary raster functionality for many types of analysis. This
workshop aims to make the transition from raster to terra as painless as
possible.

## Learning Goals

-   Get a sense for the functionality of the terra package as a whole
-   Be able to translate existing code from deprecated packages to terra
    syntax
-   Know where to find more information about `terra`.

## Prerequisites

-   Familiarity with `raster` and `sp`

## Resources

-   [Spatial Data with terra on
    rspatial.org](https://rspatial.org/spatial/index.html) - How to do
    spatial data analysis in the context of R and the `terra` package.

-   [terra documentation on
    rspatial.org](https://rspatial.org/pkg/index.html) - A vignette that
    walks you through the `terra` package.

-   [terra documentation on
    github](https://rspatial.github.io/terra/reference/terra-package.html) -
    An overview of `terra` and a comprehensive description of its
    classes and methods. Highlights differences between `raster` and
    `terra`.

-   [geodata documentation on
    github](https://github.com/rspatial/geodata) - A description of
    available data as well as some links to the original source.

## Contributing

The course reader is a live webpage, hosted through GitHub, where you
can enter curriculum content and post it to a public-facing site for
learners.

To make alterations to the reader:

1.  Check in with the reader's current maintainer and notify them about
    your intended changes. Maintainers might ask you to open an issue,
    use pull requests, tag your commits with versions, etc.

2.  Run `git pull`, or if it's your first time contributing, see
    [Setup](#setup).

3.  Edit an existing chapter file or create a new one. Chapter files are
    R Markdown files (`.Rmd`) at the top level of the repo. Enter your
    text, code, and other information directly into the file. Make sure
    your file:

    -   Follows the naming scheme `##_topic-of-chapter.Rmd` (the only
        exception is `index.Rmd`, which contains the reader's front
        page).
    -   Begins with a first-level header (like `# This`). This will be
        the title of your chapter. Subsequent section headers should be
        second-level headers (like `## This`) or below.
    -   Uses caching for resource-intensive code (see
        [Caching](#caching)).

    Put any supporting resources in `data/` or `img/`. For large files,
    see [Large Files](#large-files). You do not need to add resources
    generated by your R code (such as plots). The knit step saves these
    in `docs/` automatically.

4.  Run `knit.R` to regenerate the HTML files in the `docs/`. You can do
    this in the shell with `./knit.R` or in R with `source("knit.R")`.

5.  Run `renv::snapshot()` in an R session at the top level of the repo
    to automatically add any packages your code uses to the project
    package library.

6.  When you're finished, `git add`:

    -   Any files you added or edited directly, including in `data/` and
        `img/`
    -   `docs/` (all of it)
    -   `_bookdown_files/` (contains the **knitr** cache)
    -   `renv.lock` (contains the **renv** package list) <!--
        - `.gitattributes` (contains the Git LFS file list)
        -->

    Then `git commit` and `git push`. The live web page will update
    automatically after 1-10 minutes.

### Caching {#caching}

If one of your code chunks takes a lot of time or memory to run,
consider caching the result, so the chunk won't run every time someone
knits the reader. To cache a code chunk, add `cache=TRUE` in the chunk
header. It's best practice to label cached chunks, like so:

```{{r YOUR_CHUNK_NAME, cache=TRUE}}
# Your code...
```

Cached files are stored in the `_bookdown_files/` directory. If you ever
want to clear the cache, you can delete this directory (or its
subdirectories). The cache will be rebuilt the next time you knit the
reader.

Beware that caching doesn't work with some packages, especially packages
that use external libraries. Because of this, it's best to leave caching
off for code chunks that are not resource-intensive.

````{=html}
<!--
### Large Files

If you want to include a large file (say over 1 MB), you should use git LFS.
You can register a large file with git LFS with the shell command:

```sh
git lfs track YOUR_FILE
```

This command updates the `.gitattributes` file at the top level of the repo. To
make sure the change is saved, you also need to run:

```sh
git add .gitattributes
```

Now that your large is registered with git LFS, you can add, commit, and push
the file with git the same way you would any other file, and git LFS will
automatically intercede as needed.

GitHub provides 1 GB of storage and 1 GB of monthly bandwidth free per repo for
large files. If your large file is more than 50 MB, check with the other
contributors before adding it.
-->
````

### Github Actions

GitHub Actions can be set up to automatically render your reader when
you push new content to a repo. If you would like to use this function,
download the materials in
[datalab-dev/utilities/render_bookdown_site](https://github.com/datalab-dev/utilities/tree/main/render_bookdown_site)
and follow the instructions there.

## Setup {#setup}

````{=html}
<!--
### Git LFS

This repo uses [Git Large File Storage][git-lfs] (git LFS) for large files. If
you don't have git LFS installed, [download it][git-lfs] and run the installer.
Then in the shell (in any directory), run:

```sh
git lfs install
```

Then your one-time setup of git LFS is done. Next, clone this repo with `git
clone`. The large files will be downloaded automatically with the rest of the
repo.

[git-lfs]: https://git-lfs.github.com/
-->
````

[Back to Top](#top)
